Add executable gossip validation functions for electra (#5238)
ethereum/consensus-specs: specs/electra/p2p-interface.md

    if block.slot <= store.blocks[block.parent_root].slot:
        raise GossipReject("block is not from a higher slot than its parent")

    # [REJECT] The current finalized checkpoint is an ancestor of the block
    checkpoint_block = get_checkpoint_block(
        store, block.parent_root, store.finalized_checkpoint.epoch
    )
    if checkpoint_block != store.finalized_checkpoint.root:
        raise GossipReject("finalized checkpoint is not an ancestor of block")

    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7691]
    # [REJECT] The length of KZG commitments is less than or equal to the limit
    if len(block.body.blob_kzg_commitments) > MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_ELECTRA:
        raise GossipReject("too many blob kzg commitments")

    # [REJECT] The block is proposed by the expected proposer for the slot
    # (if shuffling is not available, IGNORE instead and MAY be queued for later)
    parent_state = store.block_states[block.parent_root].copy()
    process_slots(parent_state, block.slot)
    expected_proposer = get_beacon_proposer_index(parent_state)
    if block.proposer_index != expected_proposer:
        raise GossipReject("block proposer_index does not match expected proposer")

>     # Mark this block as seen for this proposer/slot combination

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # Mark this block as seen
```

    current_time_ms: uint64,
) -> None:
    """
    Validate a SignedAggregateAndProof for gossip propagation.
    Raises GossipIgnore or GossipReject on validation failure.
    """
    aggregate_and_proof = signed_aggregate_and_proof.message
    aggregate = aggregate_and_proof.aggregate
    aggregation_bits = aggregate.aggregation_bits

    # [New in Electra:EIP7549]
    # [REJECT] The aggregate attestation's data index is zero
    if aggregate.data.index != 0:
        raise GossipReject("aggregate data index is non-zero")

    # [New in Electra:EIP7549]
    # [REJECT] Exactly one committee is specified by the committee bits
    committee_indices = get_committee_indices(aggregate.committee_bits)
    if len(committee_indices) != 1:
        raise GossipReject("aggregate committee bits must specify exactly one committee")
    index = committee_indices[0]

    # [REJECT] The committee index is within the expected range
    committee_count = get_committee_count_per_slot(state, aggregate.data.target.epoch)
    if index >= committee_count:
        raise GossipReject("committee index out of range")

    # [IGNORE] The aggregate attestation's slot is not from a future slot

>     # (with a MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY allowance).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # (MAY be queued for processing at the appropriate slot)
```

    if not is_not_from_future_slot(state, aggregate.data.slot, current_time_ms):
        raise GossipIgnore("aggregate slot is from a future slot")

    # [IGNORE] The aggregate attestation's epoch is either the current or previous epoch

>     # (with a MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY allowance).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # (MAY be queued for processing at the appropriate slot)
```

    committee = get_beacon_committee(state, aggregate.data.slot, index)
    if len(aggregation_bits) != len(committee):
        raise GossipReject("aggregation bits length does not match committee size")

    # [REJECT] The aggregate attestation has participants
    attesting_indices = get_attesting_indices(state, aggregate)
    if len(attesting_indices) < 1:
        raise GossipReject("aggregate has no participants")

    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7549]
    # [IGNORE] A valid aggregate with a superset of aggregation bits has not already been seen
    aggregate_data_root = hash_tree_root(aggregate.data)
    aggregate_cache_key = (aggregate_data_root, index)
    aggregate_bits = tuple(bool(bit) for bit in aggregation_bits)
    seen_aggregation_bits = seen.aggregate_data_roots.get(aggregate_cache_key, set())
    for prior_aggregation_bits in seen_aggregation_bits:
        is_non_strict_superset = True
        for prior_bit, aggregate_bit in zip(prior_aggregation_bits, aggregate_bits):
            if aggregate_bit and not prior_bit:
                is_non_strict_superset = False
                break
        if is_non_strict_superset:

>             raise GossipIgnore("already seen aggregate for this data")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    seen_bits = seen.aggregate_data_roots.get(aggregate_cache_key, set())
    if is_non_strict_superset(seen_bits, aggregate_bits):
        raise GossipIgnore("already seen aggregate for this data")
```

        raise GossipReject("validator is not selected as aggregator")

    # [REJECT] The aggregator's validator index is within the committee
    if aggregator_index not in committee:
        raise GossipReject("aggregator index not in committee")

    # [REJECT] The selection proof signature is valid
    aggregator = state.validators[aggregator_index]
    domain = get_domain(state, DOMAIN_SELECTION_PROOF, target_epoch)
    signing_root = compute_signing_root(aggregate.data.slot, domain)
    if not bls.Verify(aggregator.pubkey, signing_root, aggregate_and_proof.selection_proof):
        raise GossipReject("invalid selection proof signature")

    # [REJECT] The aggregator signature is valid
    domain = get_domain(state, DOMAIN_AGGREGATE_AND_PROOF, target_epoch)
    signing_root = compute_signing_root(aggregate_and_proof, domain)
    if not bls.Verify(aggregator.pubkey, signing_root, signed_aggregate_and_proof.signature):
        raise GossipReject("invalid aggregator signature")

    # [REJECT] The aggregate signature is valid
    if not is_valid_indexed_attestation(state, get_indexed_attestation(state, aggregate)):
        raise GossipReject("invalid aggregate signature")

>     # [IGNORE] The block being voted for has been seen

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # [IGNORE] The block being voted for has been seen (via gossip or non-gossip sources)
```

wraps an `IndexedAttestation` payload sized for
`MAX_VALIDATORS_PER_COMMITTEE * MAX_COMMITTEES_PER_SLOT` attesting indices; the
validation logic is otherwise unchanged.

###### `blob_sidecar_{subnet_id}`

*Note*: This function is modified per EIP-7691. The sidecar's index is bounded
by `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_ELECTRA`.

```python
def validate_blob_sidecar_gossip(
    seen: Seen,
    store: Store,
    state: BeaconState,
    blob_sidecar: BlobSidecar,
    subnet_id: SubnetID,
    current_time_ms: uint64,
) -> None:
    """
    Validate a BlobSidecar for gossip propagation on a subnet.
    Raises GossipIgnore or GossipReject on validation failure.
    """
    block_header = blob_sidecar.signed_block_header.message

    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7691]
    # [REJECT] The sidecar's index is consistent with MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_ELECTRA
    if blob_sidecar.index >= MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK_ELECTRA:
        raise GossipReject("blob index out of range")

    # [REJECT] The sidecar is for the correct subnet
    if compute_subnet_for_blob_sidecar(blob_sidecar.index) != subnet_id:
        raise GossipReject("blob sidecar is for wrong subnet")

    # [IGNORE] The sidecar is not from a future slot

>     # (a client MAY queue future sidecars for processing at the appropriate slot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # (MAY be queued for processing at the appropriate slot)
```

        raise GossipReject("blob sidecar is not from a higher slot than its parent")

    # [REJECT] The current finalized_checkpoint is an ancestor of the sidecar's block
    checkpoint_block = get_checkpoint_block(
        store, block_header.parent_root, store.finalized_checkpoint.epoch
    )
    if checkpoint_block != store.finalized_checkpoint.root:
        raise GossipReject("finalized checkpoint is not an ancestor of blob sidecar's block")

    # [REJECT] The sidecar's inclusion proof is valid
    if not verify_blob_sidecar_inclusion_proof(blob_sidecar):
        raise GossipReject("invalid blob sidecar inclusion proof")

    # [REJECT] The sidecar's blob is valid as verified by verify_blob_kzg_proof
    if not verify_blob_kzg_proof(
        blob_sidecar.blob, blob_sidecar.kzg_commitment, blob_sidecar.kzg_proof
    ):
        raise GossipReject("invalid blob kzg proof")

    # [IGNORE] The sidecar is the first sidecar for the tuple
    # (block_header.slot, block_header.proposer_index, blob_sidecar.index)
    sidecar_tuple = (block_header.slot, block_header.proposer_index, blob_sidecar.index)
    if sidecar_tuple in seen.blob_sidecar_tuples:

>         raise GossipIgnore("already seen blob sidecar for this slot/proposer/index")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        raise GossipIgnore("already seen blob sidecar from this proposer for this slot and index")
```

    # [REJECT] The sidecar is proposed by the expected proposer_index
    # (If the proposer_index cannot immediately be verified against the expected shuffling,
    # the sidecar MAY be queued for later processing while proposers for the block's branch

>     # are calculated -- in such a case do not REJECT, instead IGNORE this message)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # (if shuffling is not available, IGNORE instead and MAY be queued for later)
```

    subnet_id: uint64,
    current_time_ms: uint64,
) -> None:
    """
    Validate a SingleAttestation for gossip propagation on a subnet.
    Raises GossipIgnore or GossipReject on validation failure.
    """
    data = attestation.data
    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7549]
    committee_index = attestation.committee_index
    attester_index = attestation.attester_index
    target_epoch = data.target.epoch

    # [New in Electra:EIP7549]
    # [REJECT] The attestation's data index is zero
    if data.index != 0:
        raise GossipReject("attestation data index is non-zero")

    # [REJECT] The committee index is within the expected range
    committees_per_slot = get_committee_count_per_slot(state, target_epoch)
    if committee_index >= committees_per_slot:
        raise GossipReject("committee index out of range")

    # [REJECT] The attestation is for the correct subnet
    expected_subnet = compute_subnet_for_attestation(
        committees_per_slot, data.slot, committee_index
    )
    if expected_subnet != subnet_id:
        raise GossipReject("attestation is for wrong subnet")

    # [IGNORE] The attestation's slot is not from a future slot

>     # (with a MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY allowance).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # (MAY be queued for processing at the appropriate slot)
```

    if not is_not_from_future_slot(state, data.slot, current_time_ms):
        raise GossipIgnore("attestation slot is from a future slot")

    # [IGNORE] The attestation's epoch is either the current or previous epoch

>     # (with a MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY allowance).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # (MAY be queued for processing at the appropriate slot)
```

    attestation_epoch = compute_epoch_at_slot(data.slot)
    is_previous_epoch_attestation = is_within_slot_range(
        state,
        compute_start_slot_at_epoch(Epoch(attestation_epoch + 1)),
        SLOTS_PER_EPOCH - 1,
        current_time_ms,
    )
    is_current_epoch_attestation = is_within_slot_range(
        state,
        compute_start_slot_at_epoch(attestation_epoch),
        SLOTS_PER_EPOCH - 1,
        current_time_ms,
    )
    if not (is_previous_epoch_attestation or is_current_epoch_attestation):
        raise GossipIgnore("attestation epoch is not previous or current epoch")

    # [REJECT] The attestation's epoch matches its target
    if target_epoch != compute_epoch_at_slot(data.slot):
        raise GossipReject("attestation epoch does not match target epoch")

    # [New in Electra:EIP7549]
    # [REJECT] The attester is a member of the committee
    committee = get_beacon_committee(state, data.slot, committee_index)
    if attester_index not in committee:
        raise GossipReject("attester is not a member of the committee")

>     # [IGNORE] No other valid attestation seen for this validator and target epoch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7549]
    # [IGNORE] No other valid attestation seen for this validator and target epoch
```

    if (attester_index, target_epoch) in seen.attestation_validator_epochs:
        raise GossipIgnore("already seen attestation from this validator for this epoch")

    # [Modified in Electra:EIP7549]
    # [REJECT] The attestation signature is valid
    attester = state.validators[attester_index]
    domain = get_domain(state, DOMAIN_BEACON_ATTESTER, target_epoch)
    signing_root = compute_signing_root(data, domain)
    if not bls.Verify(attester.pubkey, signing_root, attestation.signature):
        raise GossipReject("invalid attestation signature")

>     # [IGNORE] The block being voted for has been seen

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # [IGNORE] The block being voted for has been seen (via gossip or non-gossip sources)
```
